Reconfiguring Parallel State Machine Replication
Eduardo Alchieri∗, Fernando Dotti†, Odorico M. Mendizabal‡ and Fernando Pedone§
∗Departamento de Ciência da Computação – Universidade de Brası́lia, Brazil
†Faculdade de Informática – Pontifı́cia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
‡Centro de Ciências Computacionais – Universidade Federal do Rio Grande, Brazil
§Universitá della Svizzera italiana (USI), Switzerland
Abstract—State Machine Replication (SMR) is a well-known
technique to implement fault-tolerant systems. In SMR, servers
are replicated and client requests are deterministically executed
in the same order by all replicas. To improve performance
in multi-processor systems, some approaches have proposed
to parallelize the execution of non-conflicting requests. Such
approaches perform remarkably well in workloads dominated
by non-conflicting requests. Conflicting requests introduce ex-
pensive synchronization and result in considerable performance
loss. Current approaches to parallel SMR define the degree of
parallelism statically. However, it is often difficult to predict
the best degree of parallelism for a workload and workloads
experience variations that change their best degree of parallelism.
This paper proposes a protocol to reconfigure the degree of
parallelism in parallel SMR on-the-fly. Experiments show the
gains due to reconfiguration and shed some light on the behavior
of parallel and reconfigurable SMR.
I. INTRODUCTION
State Machine Replication (SMR) is a well-known tech-
nique to implement fault-tolerant systems [1], [2]. The idea
is to replicate servers and execute client requests determinis-
tically and in the same order at all replicas. SMR’s execution
model provides strong consistency (i.e., linearizability [3]) but
limits performance since in order to ensure determinism, repli-
cas usually execute requests sequentially. This performance
limitation is particularly important if replicas are equipped
with multiple processors.
To improve the performance of state machine replication,
some approaches have proposed to parallelize the execution
of non-conflicting requests (e.g., [4]–[7]). Two requests are
non-conflicting if they access different objects or only read
shared objects, otherwise they are conflicting. The idea behind
parallel SMR approaches is to optimize the execution of
non-conflicting requests: while conflicting requests must be
executed sequentially, by a single thread at each replica, non-
conflicting requests can be executed in parallel at replicas, by
multiple threads.
Transitioning from parallel to sequential execution requires
expensive synchronization among threads (e.g., typically a
barrier), whose cost usually increases with the number of
threads involved. This situation creates a performance tradeoff
that involves the degree of parallelism of a replica (i.e., its
number of execution threads). A high degree of parallelism
increases performance in workloads with predominantly non-
conflicting requests, but negatively impacts performance if
conflicting requests are the norm, due to the need for addi-
tional synchronization. Conversely, a low degree of parallelism
excels in workloads dominated by conflicting requests, but
underperforms in the presence of non-conflicting requests.
This performance dilemma is exacerbated by the fact that
existing approaches to parallel SMR define the degree of
parallelism statically, at system startup. Therefore, although
parallel SMR is promising, its performance hinges on the
“right” degree of parallelism, which is difficult to configure
a priori. In addition, many workloads undergo variations
during the execution [8], which affect their ideal degree of
parallelism. Motivated by these limitations, in this paper we
propose protocols to reconfigure parallel SMR on-the-fly. In
brief, the idea is to monitor the execution and reconfigure the
degree of parallelism based on the workload. The challenge
is to achieve replica reconfiguration without violating SMR’s
strong consistency guarantees.
More precisely, the paper makes the following contributions:
• We propose a way to express concurrency of a service
by means of classes of requests. Requests in a class may
conflict with other requests in the class or with requests
in other classes. Modeling concurrency with classes of
requests simplifies the scheduling of requests.
• We present a parallel SMR protocol that uses the notion
of classes of requests.
• We show that one can deploy a hybrid replicated system
in which replicas are configured with different degrees of
parallelism, in an attempt to optimize for workloads with
different characteristics.
• We present a protocol that supports reconfiguration in the
degree of parallelism, making it possible for replicas to
adapt to the workload.
• We experimentally evaluate the proposed systems using
two applications, a tuple space and a linked list. The main
conclusions of our evaluation are twofold: (a) the hybrid
system cannot sustain high performance, an inherent lim-
itation, not an artifact of our implementation; and (b) the
reconfigurable system outperforms static configurations.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II defines the system model. Section III discusses the
related work. Section IV presents our approach to expressing
concurrency through classes of requests. Section V provides
protocols for parallel, hybrid and reconfigurable SMR. Section
VI reports on an experimental evaluation. Finally, Section VII
concludes the paper.II. SYSTEM MODEL AND CONSISTENCY
We assume a distributed system composed of interconnected
processes that communicate by exchanging messages. There
is an unbounded set of clients and a bounded set of service
replicas. The system is asynchronous: there is no bound on
message delays and on relative process speeds. We assume
the crash failure model and exclude malicious and arbitrary
behavior. A process is correct if it does not fail, or faulty
otherwise. There are f faulty replicas, out of n = 2f + 1.
Processes have access to an atomic broadcast communi-
cation abstraction, defined by primitives broadcast(m) and
deliver(m), where m is a message. Atomic broadcast ensures
the following properties [9], [10]1
: (i) Validity: If a correct
process broadcasts a message m, then it eventually delivers
m. (ii) Uniform Agreement: If a process delivers a message m,
then all correct processes eventually deliver m. (iii) Uniform
Integrity: For any message m, every process delivers m at most
once, and only if m was previously broadcast by a process.
(iv) Uniform Total Order: If both processes p and q deliver
messages m and m0
, then p delivers m before m0
, if and only
if q delivers m before m0
.
Our consistency criterion is linearizability. An execution is
linearizable if it satisfies the following requirements [3]:
1) It respects the real-time ordering of requests across all
clients. There exists a real-time order among any two
requests if one request finishes at a client before the
other request starts at a client.
2) It respects the semantics of the requests as defined in
their sequential execution.
III. RELATED WORK
The performance of state machine replication is bounded
by the rate at which replicas can order and execute requests.
Many works in the literature have proposed protocols to order
messages efficiently (e.g., [13]–[19]). Less attention, however,
has been paid to increasing the rate of requests that replicas
can execute. In fact, in light of the requirement that command
execution must be deterministic, most systems based on state
machine replication execute requests sequentially. It has been
early observed, however, that requests do not have to be
executed in the same order if they do not content for the same
data items [2]. As a result, some proposals have exploited
the semantics of applications to introduce concurrency in the
execution of requests (e.g., [4]–[6], [8], [20], [21]).
In [4], the authors present CBASE, a parallel SMR where
replicas are augmented with a deterministic scheduler. Based
on application semantics, the scheduler serializes the execution
of conflicting requests according to the delivery order and
dispatches non-conflicting requests to be processed in parallel
by a pool of worker threads. Consistency is ensured since
requests are delivered in the same order at replicas and the
scheduler adopts deterministic policies to establish a partial
order for request processing.
1Atomic broadcast needs additional assumptions about the system in order
to be implemented [11], [12]. Hereafter, we simply assume the existence of
an atomic broadcast oracle.
In Rex [22], a single server receives requests and processes
them in parallel. While executing, the server logs a trace of
dependencies among requests based on the shared variables
locked by each request. The server periodically proposes the
trace for agreement to the pool of replicas. The other replicas
receive the traces and replay the execution respecting the
partial order of commands.
CRANE [23] implements a parallel SMR by deploying
deterministic versions of POSIX socket and the Pthreads
synchronization interfaces. To this aim, CRANE combines the
input determinism of Paxos and the execution determinism of
deterministic multi-threading (DMT) [24].
In [5], the authors propose a parallel SMR approach that
uses multiple multicast groups to partially order commands
across replicas, where each group leads to a different stream
of commands delivered at each replica. In this approach, non-
conflicting commands are not delivered by a single component
(e.g., the scheduler) and then scheduled for parallel execution.
Instead, non-conflicting commands can be directly delivered
by multiple worker threads by mapping command streams to
multiple sockets. Therefore, the overhead associated with a
parallelizer mechanism is minimized by this approach.
Speculative strategies are implemented by Eve [25] and
Storyboard [26]. In Eve, before execution, a primary replica
groups client commands into batches and transmits the batched
commands to all replicas. Then, replicas speculatively execute
batched commands in parallel. After the execution of a batch,
the verification stage checks the validity of replica’s state.
If too many replicas diverge, replicas roll back to the last
verified state and re-execute the commands sequentially. In
Storyboard [26], a forecasting mechanism is used. Based on
application-specific knowledge, Storyboard predicts the same
ordered sequence of locks across replicas. While forecasts are
correct, commands can be executed in parallel. If the forecast
made by the predictor does not match the execution path of
a command, then the replica has to establish a deterministic
execution order in cooperation with other replicas.
Analogously to [4], our approach implements a scheduler
that dispatches commands to worker threads: non-conflicting
commands are executed in parallel while conflicting com-
mands are serialized. In addition, our approach is independent
of the ordering protocol, which can order batches of requests
in a single instance of consensus [27]–[29], or use several
instances of consensus in parallel, in the same manner as P-
SMR [5]. Differently from all previous approaches to parallel
state machine replication, we propose to reconfigure the num-
ber of threads at run time. By changing the number of worker
threads on-the-fly, our approach is able to adapt to variations
in the workload.
Other forms of reconfiguring a state machine replication
have been proposed in the literature. For example, [30],
[31] discuss techniques to dynamically change the set of
replicas while [8], [21] propose protocols to reconfigure par-
titions and the location of objects in a scalable state machine
replication [20], respectively. These techniques are orthogonal
to the ones presented in this paper.IV. PARALLELISM IN STATE MACHINE REPLICATION
Parallel SMR exploits the fact that strong consistency does
not require all requests to be executed in the same order at all
replicas. In this section, we formalize this idea and provide
examples of applications that can exploit parallelism.
A. Conflicts, classes and correctness
To argue about the correctness of our parallel SMR algo-
rithms, we introduce next some basic definitions.
Definition 1 (Request conflict). Let ri and rj be application
requests in R, and Rri and Rrj, and Wri and Wrj the re-
quests’ readset and writeset, respectively. The conflict relation
#R ⊆ R × R among requests is given by: (ri,rj) ∈ #R if
(Wri ∩ Wrj 6= ∅) ∨ (Wri ∩ Rrj 6= ∅) ∨ (Rri ∩ Wrj 6= ∅).
Requests ri and rj conflict if (ri,rj) ∈ #R. We refer to pairs
of requests not in #R as non-conflicting or independent.
Definition 2 (Request sequence). A request sequence is a pair
(R,<R) where R is a set of requests and <R⊆ R × R is an
irreflexive total order. We assume that (R,<R) represents the
requests and their total delivery order resulting from atomic
broadcast.
Definition 3 (Request dependency relation). Given a request
sequence (R,<R) and the conflict relation #R ⊆ R × R
among requests, the derived request dependency relation ≺R
is the transitive closure of <R ∩ #R. This means that for
any two conflicting requests in R, their relation specified in
<R is in ≺R while independent requests are not related. The
transitive closure is needed to relate any two requests whose
order is induced indirectly.
Based on the definitions presented above, we now develop
a strategy to argue about the correctness of our parallel state
machine protocols.
Definition 4 (Execution). An execution of ≺R is any total
order that is compatible with ≺R.
Proposition 1. Any execution of ≺R respects linearizability.
Proof: Regarding the first strong consistency condition (Sec-
tion II), whether sequential or parallel SMR, i.e., execution
respectively according to <R or ≺R, this holds if a request
is answered only after executed. If ri is answered before
rj is issued, it implies that ri certainly executed before rj
which did not exist when ri was decided to execute. The real-
time ordering of requests is respected. If both ri and rj are
submitted and not responded, they are concurrent. In such case
the ordering protocol decides a uniform delivery order to be
followed.
Regarding the second condition (Section II), it has to be
shown that the parallel execution (i.e., any execution respect-
ing ≺R) is equivalent to a sequential one both from the clients
perspective and from the possible intermediate SMR states.
Due to the determinism of SMR requests, the resulting state
and output of a request are completely determined by the input
parameters and state. When two requests are independent,
according to Def. 1 they will read the same SMR state contents
irrespective of the order of their execution. Also, their write
sets are disjoint. Therefore, both requests will compute the
same output to the clients and state updates irrespective of the
relative orders of these requests. This means that the semantics
of such requests are the same as in their sequential execution.
Also, after both requests have executed, the SMR reaches the
same state irrespective of their order. When two requests are
dependent, then ≺R is followed. Since ≺R⊆<R, the total
order of conflicting requests is respected. 
The above definition of conflict is minimal in the sense
that it represents the exact conflicts among requests. We
now introduce the notion of classes of requests, which group
requests and their interdependencies. In the following sections,
we show how one can use request classes to schedule requests
in a simple manner. Each class has a descriptor and conflict
information. Requests belonging to conflicting classes have
to be serialized according to the ordering relation; requests
belonging to non-conflicting classes can be executed concur-
rently. Thus, requests in a class that conflicts with itself must
be serialized.
Definition 5 (Request classes). Let R = {r1,..,rnr} be the
set of request descriptors, where nr is the number of requests;
and C = {c1,..,cnc} be the set of class descriptors, where nc
is the number of request classes. We define request classes
as RC = C → P(C) × P(R),2
that is, any class in C may
conflict with any subset of classes in C, and is associated to
a subset of requests in R.
A request class set RC is correct with respect to a request
conflict #R if every conflict in #R is captured in RC, as
formally defined next.
Definition 6 (Correct request classes). Given a request conflict
relation #R, request classes RC is correct with respect to #R
if for all (ri,rj) ∈ #R, it follows that ∃Ci → (CCi,CRi) ∈
RC and ∃Cj → (CCj,CRj) ∈ RC such that: (a) ri ∈ CRi,
(b) rj ∈ CRj, (c) Cj ∈ CCi, and (d) Ci ∈ CCj.
B. Applications and request classes
We illustrate the use of classes of requests with three
applications. In Section VI we assess these applications ex-
perimentally with parallel SMR protocols.
1) Simple Tuple Space: Consider a tuple space with four
types of requests: out(t) to insert tuple t in the space, rdp(t)
to read a tuple that matches template t from the space; inp(t)
to remove a tuple that matches t from the space; and cas(t,t)
that inserts t and returns true if there is no tuple that matches
t on the space, or otherwise returns false.
We define: C = {cr,cw}, R = {rdp,out,inp,cas}, and
RC = {(cr → ({cw},{rdp})),(cw → ({cr,cw},{out,inp,
cas})). This states a concurrency model where rdp requests
do not conflict with each other while out, inp and cas requests
conflict with each other and with rdp.
2We denote the power set of set S as P(S).2) Extended Tuple Space: Now we consider that a tuple
space may store tuples with different number of fields and
model concurrency according to this information.
We define C = {ci,ci,j|1 ≤ i,j ≤ n} where n is
the maximum number of fields that tuples or templates can
have, R = {rdpi,outi,inpi,casi,j|1 ≤ i,j ≤ n}, and
RC = {(ci → ({ci,ci,j,cj,i}, {outi,inpi,rdpi}))|1 ≤ i,j ≤
n} ∪ {(ci,j → ({ci,cj,ci,k,ck,i,cj,k,ck,j},{casi,j}))|1 ≤
i,j,k ≤ n}, where subscripts i and j in outi,inpi, rdpi, and
casi,j mean the number of fields in the tuple or template. With
this concurrency model, out,inp, and rdp requests to tuples
with different number of fields are concurrent, but conflict
otherwise; and a cas request and any other request conflict if
they refer to a tuple with the same number of fields.
3) Linked List: As another example consider a linked list
used to store and retrieve integers through the following
requests: add(i), which includes i in the list and returns true if
i is not in the list, otherwise returns false; remove(i), which
removes i from the list and returns true if i is in the list,
otherwise returns false; get(p), which returns the element at
position p; and contains(i), which returns true if i is in the
list, otherwise returns false.
We specify a concurrency model where C = {cr, cw},
R = {get,contains,add,remove}, and RC = {(cr →({cw},
{get,contains})),(cw → ({cr,cw},{add,remove}))}. With
this concurrency model, get and contains requests do not
conflict with each other but conflict with add and remove
requests, which conflict with all requests.
V. PARALLEL AND RECONFIGURABLE SMR
This section presents our proposal for a parallel and re-
configurable SMR. We first show how concurrency expressed
using request classes is mapped to worker threads and then
present different approaches to parallelism in state machine
replication.
A. From request classes to threads
In parallel SMR, performance is impacted by the workload
and the number of worker threads. The workload is defined
by the application semantics and usage profile, which may
induce a higher or lower number of conflicting commands.
The number of worker threads is a consequence of replica con-
figuration, that is, a high number of worker threads increases
the parallelism in predominantly non-conflicting workloads.
To benefit from the potential parallelism of an application, both
aspects should be considered while tracking dependencies.
In our approach, interdependencies among requests are
captured by request classes. Once interdependencies among
classes are defined, parallelism is expressed by mapping
request classes to worker threads. Note that the request classes
definition is problem-oriented and architecture-independent,
while the association of request classes to worker threads is
particular to the architecture (e.g., number of processors or
cores in a replica).
We represent the mapping of request classes to threads with
function CtoT (see Def. 7 below). The CtoT mapping must
respect all interdependencies between classes. Moreover, a
condition for consistency is that if two classes conflict, then
they must be assigned to at least one thread in common.
Although in our prototype the application developer must
provide the CtoT, we believe one could automate the creation
of CtoT for a given request class.
Definition 7 (Classes to threads, CtoT). If T = {t0,..,tn−1}
is the set of replica thread identifiers, where n is the number
of threads, and C is the set of class names as in Def. 5, then
CtoT = C → P(T).
In the Simple Tuple Space and Linked List, we can define
the mapping as CtoT(cr) = ∅ (i.e., requests can be concur-
rently executed by any threads) and CtoT(cw) = {t0,..,tn−1}
(i.e., all threads must synchronize before a request is executed).
In the Extended Tuple Space, considering tuples with at
most n fields, we can define CtoT(ci) = CtoT(ci,j|i =
j) = {ti−1} (i.e., a single thread executes a request without
synchronization) and CtoT(ci,j|i 6= j) = {ti−1,tj−1} (i.e.,
two threads must synchronize for the execution).
B. A protocol for parallel SMR
Whenever a request is delivered by the atomic broadcast
protocol, the scheduler (Algorithm 1) assigns it to one or
more worker threads, according to the request class. Each
thread executes its requests (Algorithm 2), synchronizing the
execution of conflicting requests to preserve consistency.
Scheduler. The communication between the scheduler and
worker threads takes place through synchronized queues. Re-
quests that could be concurrently executed are associated to a
unique thread in a round-robin policy (putAny), otherwise
all threads involved receive the request to synchronize the
execution (putOnConflicting).
Algorithm 1 Scheduler.
variables: Variables used by the scheduler.
// used definitions: C (classes), CtoT (class to conflicting threads)
n // the number of worker threads
queues[0,...,n − 1] ← ∅ // queue per thread (see Alg. 2)
nextThread ← 0 // thread to exec next non-conflicting request
barriers = barrier[C] // one barrier for each class
auxiliary functions:
putAny(req)
1) queues[nextThread].fifoPut(req) // assigns req to a thread...
2) nextThread ← (nextThread + 1)%n //...in round-robin policy
putOnConflicting(req)
3) ∀t ∈ CtoT(req.classId) // all conflicting threads ...
4) queues[t].fifoPut(req) // ... synchronize to exec req
on initialization:
5) ∀c ∈ C, barriers(c) ← new barrier for |CtoT(c)| threads
on deliver(req):
6) if CtoT(req.classId) = ∅ then // no conflicts
7) putAny(req)
8) else // a conflict
9) putOnConflicting(req)
10) end if
Worker Threads. Upon receiving a request that could be con-
currently executed, the thread simply executes it. Otherwise,
the thread uses the corresponding barriers to synchronize with
the involved threads (execWithBarrier).Algorithm 2 Worker Threads.
variables: Variables used by each worker thread.
// used definitions: C (classes), CtoT (class to conflicting threads)
n // the number of worker threads
myId ← id ∈ {0,...,n − 1} // thread id, n is the number of threads
queue // the synchronized queue with requests for this thread
barriers = barrier[C] // one barrier for each class (see Alg. 1)
auxiliary functions:
execWithBarrier(req,barrier, threadIds)
1) if myId = min(threadIds) then // thread with smallest id ...
2) barrier.await() // ... waits for other threads to stop ...
3) exec(req) // ... executes the request ...
4) barrier.await() // ... and resumes other threads
5) else
6) barrier.await() // thread signalizes ok to execute ...
7) barrier.await() // ... and waits for the execution
8) end if
on thread run:
9) while true do
10) req ← queue.fifoGet() // awaits until a request is available
11) if CtoT(req.classId) = ∅ then // no conflict
12) exec(req) // executes request and replies to client
13) else // conflict: synchronizes with involved threads
14) execWithBarrier
(req,barriers(req.classId),CtoT(req.classId))
15) end if
16) end while
1) Why it works: Here we argue that the above described
execution model respects ≺R as discussed in Section IV.
Definition 8 (Replica). Given a request sequence (R,<R), a
replica Rp is a finite set of worker threads that execute this
request sequence, that is Rp = {WTi|0 ≤ i ≤ n − 1,n ∈
N,WTi = (Ri,<Ri ) is also a request sequence} such that
(see Algorithm 1):
i) All requests in R are enqueued at some worker thread: S
0≤i≤n−1 Ri = R; which is granted since every delivered
request is assigned either to one thread (no conflict case); or
to a subset of conflicting threads.
ii) The queues of the worker threads are compatible with the
request sequence order: <Ri
=<R |Ri
; <R is represented by
the total delivery order. Since on deliver is performed in the
delivery order, the scheduler appends requests to threads in the
correct sequence. The total order of each <Ri is compatible
with <R.
iii) A request is in multiple threads if and only if it depends
on items on those threads: r ∈ Ri and r ∈ Rj with i 6= j ⇔
(∃ri ∈ Ri,rj ∈ Rj,ri ≺R r and rj ≺R r). This is ensured
by on deliver. It identifies conflicts with all involved threads
and enqueues the request to all of them.
Considering that each replica has the same conflict classes,
requests will be enqueued to the same threads and thus induce
the same dependencies. Note that since <Ri
is an image of
<R, the dependency relation on requests of Ri, ≺Ri
, must be
≺R restricted to the items in Ri.
Definition 9 (Replica run). Given a Rp with n worker threads
WT over a request sequence (R,<R), a complete run π of
replica Rp is a list defined inductively as follows (• denotes
the inclusion of an element in front of a list):
i) π is the empty list if all worker threads are empty;
ii) π = r • π0
if
a) r is the first request of a set of m worker threads of
Rp and r does not appear in any other worker thread.
b) π0
is the replica run of the replica R0
obtained by
removing r from all worker threads in which it appeared.
This behavior is implemented in Algorithm 2. In case r
appears in only one queue the thread executes it. Other-
wise every involved worker thread eventually dequeues
r and enters a barrier with other threads in classId.
Only one thread executes r and all other threads wait
for it to complete.
Given the formalization above of a replica run, now we have
to discuss that such a run is an execution of ≺R which has
been argued to be linearizable.
Proposition 2. Replica run is an execution of ≺R.
Proof: The run π of a replica is:
i) the empty list: the empty execution satisfies ≺R;
ii) π = r•π0
, in which case we have to show that the choice
of executing r respects ≺R. r is the first request of a
set of m worker threads of Rp and r does not appear in
any other worker thread. In this case r conflicted with
requests of threads in m, according to Def. 8.iii. For each
thread WTi in m, r respects ≺Ri
, as discussed. Since S
0≤i≤n−1 Ri = R (Def. 8.i) and since a request r is in
multiple threads iff it depends in items on those threads
(Def. 8.iii), each dependency relation ≺Ri is compatible
with ≺R and all dependencies of r on other requests
in (R,≺R) are accordingly mapped to ≺Ri
∈ m. This
ensures that the execution r • π0
respects ≺R. The case
where r appears in a single thread is a particular case
where m has only one thread. Either r conflicted with
prior requests for the thread or r is independent. The
first case is correct due to the Fifo execution. In the
second case, independent requests are assigned to some
Ri, having a valid order since any order would suffice.
Since a replica run is an execution of ≺R, according to
Proposition 1 a replica run is safe. 
C. Replicas with different configurations
In an attempt to optimize for workloads with predominance
for both conflicting and non-conflicting requests, replicas
could be configured with different degrees of parallelism,
ranging from sequential to a predefined maximum threshold.
The idea is that sequential replicas execute faster conflicting
requests while parallel replicas provide high performance for
non-conflicting requests. Consequently, the system will present
good perfomance in both scenarios.
The modified scheduler is presented in Algorithm 3 while
the new algorithm for worker threads is shown in Algorithm 4.
The main difference from the previous protocol is that we
must handle the case of replicas that have fewer threads than
the target number of threads in the CtoT mapping. These
requests are mapped to all threads, which must synchronize
their execution to ensure linearizability.1) Why it works: The general argument is that Proposition
2 is independent of the number of threads. In more detail,
Algorithms 3 and 4 only differ from Algorithms 1 and 2,
respectively, in that they verify if the set of conflicting threads
returned by function CtoT is supported by the replica’s con-
figuration. If it is, Algorithms 3 and 4 behave as Algorithms 1
and 2. Otherwise, Algorithms 3 and 4 synchronize all threads
to execute the request. This preserves safety since this enforces
the total delivery order in such cases, which is always correct.
All executions will preserve the total order of conflicting
requests, which satisfies ≺R.
Algorithm 3 Scheduler for different configurations.
variables: // Same as in Alg. 1, adding:
bAll // new: barrier to synchronize all threads
auxiliary functions: // Same as in Alg. 1, adding:
putAll(req)
1) ∀q ∈ {0,...,n − 1} // all threads ...
2) queues[q].fifoPut(req) // ... synchronize to exec req
on initialization: Same as in Alg. 1, adding:
bAll ← new barrier for n threads
on deliver(req):
3) if CtoT(req.classId) = ∅ then // no conflict
4) putAny(req) // Same as in Alg. 1
5) else // conflicts
6) if ∀tId ∈ CtoT(req.classId),tId < n then // a valid set of threads
7) putOnConflicting(req) // Same as in Alg. 1
8) else
9) putAll(req) // New behavior
10) end if
11) end if
Algorithm 4 Worker Threads for different configurations.
variables: // Same as Alg. 2, adding:
bAll // new: barrier to synchronize all threads (see Alg. 3)
auxiliary functions: // Same as Alg. 2
on thread run:
1) while true do
2) req ← queue.fifoGet() // Same as Alg. 2
3) if CtoT(req.classId) = ∅ then
4) exec(req)
5) else // conflict
6) if ∀tId ∈ CtoT(req.classId),tId < n then
7) // a valid set of threads, do the same as in Alg. 2
8) execWithBarrier
(req,barriers(req.classId),CtoT(req.classId))
9) else // otherwise: new behavior
10) execWithBarrier(req,bAll,{0,...,n − 1})
11) end if
12) end if
13) end while
D. Reconfiguration
In the protocols discussed so far, the number of worker
threads of a replica (i.e., the replica’s degree of parallelism) is
defined statically, at system startup. The degree of parallelism
of a replica is important and directly affects the performance
of the system [5]. A large number of threads tends to increase
performance in workloads with many non-conflicting requests,
but performance decreases with the increase in the number
of conflicting requests. A small number of threads hurts
performance in workloads with few conflicting requests.
Since the workload may change during the execution, and
given the constraints described above, setting an ideal number
of worker threads a priori is a difficult task, although fun-
damental to achieving good performance. We now present a
reconfiguration protocol that changes the number of threads
during the execution, adapting to the current workload.
The main idea of the protocol is to divide threads into
active and inactive. A thread is active if it is able to execute
requests, otherwise it is considered inactive. Only the active
threads will participate in parallel SMR execution and thus
impact system performance. The reconfiguration takes place
by activating and deactivating threads. At system startup, in
addition to specifying the initial number of active threads,
the system administrator must also set the minimum and
maximum threads that can be active at the same time and
provide a policy with the rules to be followed for activating
and deactivating threads.
Algorithm 5 Reconfigurable Scheduler.
variables: // Same as in Alg. 3, with following additions/redefinitions:
minThreads // new: the minimum number of active worker threads
maxThreads // new: the maximum number of active worker threads
bMax // new: barrier for maxThreads number of threads
n // redef: not all threads but number of threads in use (active)
n0 // new: next number of active threads
queues[0,...,maxThreads − 1] ← ∅ // redef: queues to all threads
auxiliary functions: // Same as in Alg. 3, overwriting to n’:
putAny(req)
1) queues[nextThread].fifoPut(req) // assigns req to an active thread
2) nextThread ← (nextThread + 1)% n’ //in roud-robin policy
putAll(req) =
3) ∀q ∈ {0,...,n’−1} // all active threads ...
4) queues[q].fifoPut(req) // ... synchronize to exec req
checkForReconfiguration(req)
5) num ← reconfigPolicy(req,minThreads,n0,maxThreads)
6) if num 6= 0 ∧ (minThreads ≤ n0 + num ≤ maxThreads) then
7) n0 ← n0 + num
8) nextThread ← 0
9) ∀q ∈ {0,...,maxThreads − 1}
10) queues[q].put(RECONFIG(n’)) // all threads have it
11) end if
on initialization: // Same as in Alg. 3, adding:
bMax ← new barrier for maxThreads number of threads
n = n0 ← number of active threads
on deliver(req): // lines 3 to 11 of Alg. 3 changing n by n0
12) if CtoT(req.classId) = ∅ then // no conflict
13) putAny(req)
14) else // conflicts
15) if ∀tId ∈ CtoT(req.classId),tId < n0 then
16) putOnConflicting(req)
17) else
18) putAll(req)
19) end if
20) end if
21) checkForReconfiguration(req)
Scheduler. The scheduler (Algorithm 5) performs similarly to
the previously described schedulers. However, it adds behavior
to reconfigure the number of active threads, described in
checkForReconfiguration. First, the reconfiguration policy
is used to verify the need for reconfiguration, which should
return the number of threads to activate (a positive number) or
deactivate (a negative number). Activated/deactivated threads
will always be the ones with the highest identifiers. If it
is necessary to reconfigure the system, a special request(RECONFIG) is added in the queue of all threads (even the
inactive ones, which also participate in the reconfiguration).
Worker Threads. The additional behavior in the worker
threads (Algorithm 6) is that they need to execute RECONFIG
requests to update the number and barrier for all active threads.
Algorithm 6 Worker Threads for reconfigurable replicas.
variables: // Same as in Alg. 4, with following additions/redefinitions::
maxThreads // new: the maximum number of active worker threads
myId ← id ∈ {0,...,maxThreads − 1} // redef: to maxThreads
bMax // new: barrier to synchronize maxThreads number of threads
n // redef: not all threads but number of threads in use (active)
bAll // redef: barrier to synchronize not all threads but all active threads
auxiliary functions: // Same as Alg. 4, adding:
exec(RECONFIG(newN)) = // add: definition of exec for reconfiguration
1) bAll ← new barrier for newN threads // redefine barrier with the
// newN calculated in checkForReconfiguration
2) n ← newN // switch worker threads to work with next value
on thread run:
3) while true do
4) req ← queue.fifoGet()
5) if req 6= RECONFIG then // Same as Alg. 4
6) lines 3 to 12 of Alg. 4
7) else // new behavior - reconfiguration
8) execWithBarrier(req,bMax,{0,...,maxThreads − 1})
9) end if
10) end while
1) Reconfiguration Policies: The definition of the new sys-
tem configuration and when to adopt it follows a reconfigura-
tion policy which is specified by the user. The policy considers
the request being scheduled, the current number of active
threads, in addition to the minimum and maximum number
of active threads for the replica. Replicas could use different
policies since they can run with different configurations.
Algorithm 7 Reconfiguration Policy.
variables: Variables and sets used.
counter ← 0 // counter for the number of received requests
conflict ← 0 // counter for the number of conflict requests
period ← 2000 // number of requests to check for reconfigurations
int reconfigPolicy(request, minThreads, currentThreads, maxThreads)
1) counter ← counter + 1
2) if | CtoT(request.classId) | 6= 0 then
3) conflict ← conflict + 1
4) end if
5) if counter = period then
6) p ← conflict ∗ 100/period; conflict ← 0; counter ← 0
7) if (p ≤ 20) ∧ ((currentThreads + 1) ≤ maxThreads) then
8) return 1
9) else if (p > 20) ∧
((currentThreads − 1) ≥ minThreads) then
10) return -1
11) end if
12) end if
13) return 0
Algorithm 7 presents an example policy, which states that
for every 2000 requests the percentage of conflicting requests
is calculated. If the workload has an amount of up to 20% of
conflicting requests, an additional thread is activated, until the
maximum number of threads is reached. Otherwise, a thread is
deactivated until the minimum number of threads is reached.
With a workload of over 20% conflicting requests, a lot of
synchronization is needed and generally better performance is
obtained with a sequential execution [5].
2) Why it works: To keep the execution safe it has to be
shown that the replica run satisfies ≺R even if the replica
is reconfigured to a different number of working threads. As
already argued in Section V-C1, replicas with different number
of threads subject to the same request sequence (R,<R)
generate the same results (satisfy ≺R). Since the number of
threads is not important to keep safety, correctly switching
the number of active threads will generate safe executions.
We substantiate this claim by showing that the computation
before and after the reconfiguration is generated correctly.
When the scheduler decides to change the number of threads
(i.e., update n0
), a reconfig(n0
) request is appended to all
(maxThreads) threads. At this moment it is the last request
of all queues and all threads synchronize to execute it. With
this we have a point of reference in the concurrent execution of
worker threads. Now we argue that requests before this point
of reference are processed correctly. Any request processed
before reconfig is enqueued is assumed correct by previous
argumentation (algorithms without reconfiguration) since the
logic is the same. Any request prior to an enqueued reconfig
was enqueued considers the previous value of n. Since the
barrier bAll is only modified when reconfig is executed (and
not when it is enqueued), bAll accords to the value of n previ-
ous to reconfiguration and thus involves the correct number of
active threads before reconfig. By previous argumentation,
the prefix before reconfig is correct.
Now we argue about the correct processing after reconfig.
reconfig is executed in mutual exclusion. It changes the
value of bAll and n according to the new number of threads
informed in the request reconfig(n0
). According to the sched-
uler, any request enqueued after reconfig considered the new
number of active threads n0
. When reconfig takes place it
updates bAll and n (which is used in worker threads) to the
new value n0
. Therefore after the point of reference provided
by reconfig, the number of active threads considered n
accord to the barrier bAll and to n0
(i.e., the number of
active threads considered by the scheduler after the respective
reconfig(n0
) was issued). This establishes a correct execution
after reconfig. Since n0
is only used at the scheduler and the
new n for worker threads is informed in the reconfig(n0
)
message, one can observe that several enqueued reconfig
messages with different number of active threads are possible
and the service requests enqueued between any two reconfigs
are processed with the correct values of n and bAll at worker
threads. It is also clear that the reconfig process does not
lose, insert, or change the order of requests in the queues.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
In order to assess the performance of parallel state machine
replication, we implemented the proposed protocols in the
BFT-SMART environment [27] and conducted experiments
in Emulab [32]. BFT-SMART was developed in Java and its
atomic broadcast protocol executes a sequence of consensus
instances, where each instance orders a batch of requests.
Experimental Setup: The Emulab environment was config-
ured with 5 d710 machines (2.4 GHz 64-bit Intel Quad CoreXeon E5530 with 2 CPU threads per core, 12GB of RAM
and 1 Gbps network cards) and a 1Gbps switched network.
The software installed on the machines was Ubuntu 14 64-bit
and a 64-bit Java virtual machine version 1.8.0 121. For all
experiments, BFT-SMART was configured with three replicas
hosted in separate machines to tolerate up to one replica crash,
while 90 clients were distributed uniformly across another two
machines. We evaluated the raw throughput of the system at
the servers and the latency perceived at the clients over the
course of 300 seconds.
Goals: Our main goal is to analyze the differences among
the previously discussed approaches and show how reconfig-
urations could increase the performance. The first set of ex-
periments shows the expressiveness of the classes of requests
proposed to model concurrency (Section VI-A). The second
set of experiments depicts the behavior of the system under
different replica configurations (Section VI-B). Finally, the last
set of experiments shows how reconfigurations could improve
performance (Section VI-C).
Notation: We use the notation xPyS to represent the con-
figuration with x parallel and y sequential replicas. Except
for the execution with reconfiguration, parallel replicas were
configured with 10 working threads.
A. Modeling concurrency with classes of requests
To show how concurrency modeling impacts performance,
we implemented a tuple space and analyzed the two models
defined in Section IV-B using the thread mappings (CtoT)
presented at Section V-A. The tuple space was initialized with
100k tuples, with the number of fields uniformly distributed
from 1 to 10 at each replica. As for the workload, each client
submits one of the possible requests at a time, rdp, inp, out
and cas, and all request types appear in equal proportion in
the workload. The number of fields for a tuple or template in
each operation was uniformly distributed from 1 to 10.
Figure 1 presents the results for sequential and parallel
executions for both concurrency models. The Simple Tuple
Space (TS) concurrency model allows reduced concurrency,
resulting in a workload with 75% of conflicting requests. This
significantly impacts performance, which is worse than in a
sequential execution (0P3S) due to the need for additional
synchronization.
1
2
3
4
Throughput (Kops/sec)
0P3S
3P0S - Simple TS
3P0S - Extended TS
(a) Throughput
20
50
70
Latency (ms)
0P3S
3P0S - Simple TS
3P0S - Extended TS
(b) Latency
Fig. 1. Sequential vs. parallel executions for two concurrency models.
The Extended Tuple Space (TS) concurrency model, how-
ever, results in performance that is more than twice the
performance of the sequential execution. In this model, out,
rdp and inp requests handling tuples or templates with the
same number of fields are mapped and sequentially executed
by a single thread, but are executed concurrently with other
requests for tuples or templates with different number of fields.
cas requests may be mapped to one or two threads, depending
on the request parameters. This model improves performance
since it only needs to synchronize groups of two threads in cas
executions. No other expensive synchronization among threads
is necessary. These results show that classes of requests can
precisely capture the concurrency of an application.
B. Replicas with different degrees of parallelism
We use a linked list implementation, the concurrency model
defined at Section IV-B, and the thread mapping (CtoT)
presented at Section V-A to analyze the performance of
deployments in which replicas are statically configured with
different degrees of parallelism. The list was initialized with
100k entries at each replica and we used add and contains
to represent operations of classes cw and cr, respectively. The
parameter for these operations was always the last element in
the list. Consequently, operations in an execution have similar
cost, leading to more stable measurements.
Figure 2 presents the results for different replica config-
urations under workloads composed of contains requests
only, add requests only, and mixed requests, where clients
cycle through 60-second periods during which one request
type is submitted only, starting with contains. Recall that
while contains requests do not conflict with each other, any
two add requests conflict. The throughput presented is the
average obtained throughout the execution. For workloads with
only contains or add requests, there was little variation in
throughput and latency during the execution, while for the
mixed workload throughput and latency fluctuate over time
(more details about the mixed workload in the next section).
For the mixed workload, we also show the results for the
reconfiguration technique (REC).
1
2
5
7
8
contains add mixed
Throughput (Kops/sec)
0P3S
1P2S
2P1S
3P0S
REC
(a) Throughput
5
10
50
100
contains add mixed
Latency (ms)
0P3S
1P2S
2P1S
3P0S
REC
(b) Latency
Fig. 2. Different replica configurations.
The system with different replica configurations (1P2S and
2P1S) presented better performance for both contains or
add workloads, while parallel (3P0S) and sequential (0P3S)0
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0 60 120 180 240 250 300
60 120 180 240
contains add contains add contains
First add (rs) First add (rp)
Throughput (Kops/sec)
Time (seconds)
Parallel replica (rp)
Sequential replica (rs)
Fig. 3. Parallel vs. sequential replica throughput for the mixed workload.
0
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0 60 120 180 240 300
60 120 180 240
contains add contains add contains
Throughput (Kops/sec)
Time (seconds)
3P0S
0P3S
(a) Sequential vs. Parallel
0
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0 60 120 180 240 300
60 120 180 240
contains add contains add contains
Throughput (Kops/sec)
Time (seconds)
REC
0P3S
(b) Sequential vs. Reconfigurable
Fig. 4. Throughput for the mixed workload and reconfigurations.
configurations outperform each other in the presence of non-
conflicting and conflicting requests, respectively. This means
that, unlike a traditional P-SMR [5], [6], hybrid approaches
that mix replicas with different degrees of parallelism provide
good performance for both workloads. Unfortunately, how-
ever, the hybrid approach has two serious drawbacks: (i) the
resources of the replicas that lag behind could exhaust rapidly,
making the replicas crash or drop requests; and (ii) it does not
provide the best performance for mixed workloads.
Figure 3 depicts the behavior of a parallel and a sequential
replica of configuration 1P2S for the mixed workload. The
figure shows the sequential replica became substantially de-
layed while executing contains requests and only executed
the first add request at time 250 while the parallel replica
executed the first add request at time 60 seconds. From second
60 to 250, the sequential replica stored approximately 650k
operations in its buffer, the number of operations executed by
the parallel replica in this period. For workloads with enough
non-conflicting requests, this situation would eventually lead
to a buffer overflow. Ironically, due to the delay, the sequential
replica does not help improve performance when requests
conflict and the system will run at the pace of the parallel
replica, even though the parallel replica is not the best choice
for conflicting requests. We conclude that one cannot optimize
performance of state machine replication by mixing replicas
with different degrees of parallelism.C. Reconfiguration in action
We used the same linked list implementation, configurations
and the mixed workload of the previous experiments to show
how reconfiguration can boost performance. Figure 4 presents
the throughput for sequential (0P3S), parallel (3P0S) and re-
configurable (REC) executions. The hybrid systems (1P2S and
2P1S) presented a behavior similar to the parallel execution
since the performance was determinated by parallel replicas
(see previous discussion about Figure 3). In the reconfigurable
execution, the system started with only 1 active thread and
used the policy of Algorithm 7 to activate/deactivate threads,
ranging from 1 to 10 active threads. Figure 2 (mixed columns)
shows the average throughput and latency perceived by clients.
Reconfiguration improves system performance and, at the
same time, saves resources since threads are deactivated when
they are unnecessary and their presence may negatively impact
performance. For example, at time 60 seconds when clients
start to invoke only dependent requests, performance drops to
approximately 0.8 Kops/sec and the system starts to deactivate
threads. After approximately 10 seconds, it remains with only
one active thread and the throughput becomes similar to a
sequential execution (approximately 1.8 Kops/sec). Notice that
the policy will define the time to react after a workload change.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
This paper reports on our efforts to increase the performance
of parallel state machine replication by dynamically adapting
the degree of parallelism of replicas. Dynamic reconfiguration
is important since when it comes to setting the ideal degree
of parallelism for a workload, there is no “one-size-fits-all”
solution. Configurations with few threads perform well with
conflicting operations, but cannot reach high performance in
the absence of conflicts; conversely, configurations with many
threads maximize performance in the absence of conflicts,
but introduce too much overhead when handling conflicting
requests. Moreover, we show that combining replicas with dif-
ferent degrees of parallelism introduces important drawbacks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported in part by CAPES (Brazil)
and CNPq (Brazil) through projects Scalable Dependability
(PVE 88887.124751/2014-00) and FREESTORE (Universal
457272/2014-7), respectively.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Lamport, “Time, clocks, and the ordering of events in a distributed
system,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 558–565, 1978.
[2] F. B. Schneider, “Implementing fault-tolerant service using the state
machine aproach: A tutorial,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 22, no. 4,
pp. 299–319, Dec. 1990.
[3] M. Herlihy and J. M. Wing, “Linearizability: A correctness condition
for concurrent objects,” ACM Transactions on Programing Languages
and Systems, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 463–492, Jul. 1990.
[4] R. Kotla and M. Dahlin, “High throughput byzantine fault tolerance,” in
IEEE/IFIP Int. Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks, 2004.
[5] P. J. Marandi, C. E. Bezerra, and F. Pedone, “Rethinking state-machine
replication for parallelism,” in IEEE International Conference on Dis-
tributed Computing Systems, 2014.
[6] P. J. Marandi and F. Pedone, “Optimistic parallel state-machine replica-
tion,” in IEEE Int. Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 2014.
[7] M. Zbierski, “Parallel byzantine fault tolerance,” in Soft Computing in
Computer and Information Science, ser. Advances in Intelligent Systems
and Computing, A. Wilinski, I. E. Fray, and J. Pejas, Eds. Springer
Publishing, 2015, vol. 342, pp. 321–333.
[8] L. H. Le, C. E. Bezerra, and F. Pedone, “Dynamic scalable state machine
replication,” in IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable
Systems and Networks, 2016.
[9] V. Hadzilacos and S. Toueg, “Fault-tolerant broadcasts and related
problems,” in Distributed Systems, S. Mullender, Ed. New York, NY,
USA: ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1993, pp. 97–145.
[10] X. Défago, A. Schiper, and P. Urbán, “Total order broadcast and
multicast algorithms: Taxonomy and survey,” ACM Computing Surveys,
vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 372–421, Dec. 2004.
[11] M. J. Fischer, N. A. Lynch, and M. S. Paterson, “Impossibility of
distributed consensus with one faulty process,” Journal of the ACM,
vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 374–382, Apr. 1985.
[12] T. D. Chandra and S. Toueg, “Unreliable failure detectors for reliable
distributed systems,” Journal of ACM, vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 225–267, 1996.
[13] M. Castro and B. Liskov, “Practical byzantine fault-tolerance and
proactive recovery,” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, vol. 20,
no. 4, pp. 398–461, Nov. 2002.
[14] M. Abd-El-Malek, G. Ganger, G. Goodson, M. Reiter, and J. Wylie,
“Fault-scalable byzantine fault-tolerant services,” in ACM Symposium
on Operating Systems Principles, 2005.
[15] L. Lamport, “Fast paxos,” Distributed Computing, vol. 19, no. 2.
[16] P. J. Marandi, M. Primi, N. Schiper, and F. Pedone, “Ring paxos: A
high-throughput atomic broadcast protocol,” in IEEE/IFIP International
Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks, 2010.
[17] J. Cowling, D. Myers, B. Liskov, R. Rodrigues, and L. Shrira, “HQ-
Replication: A hybrid quorum protocol for byzantine fault tolerance,”
in Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, 2006.
[18] R. Kotla, L. Alvisi, M. Dahlin, A. Clement, and E. Wong, “Zyzzyva:
Speculative byzantine fault tolerance,” ACM Transactions on Computer
Systems, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 7:1–7:39, Dec. 2009.
[19] R. Guerraoui, N. Knežević, V. Quéma, and M. Vukolić, “The next 700
BFT protocols,” in European Conference on Computer Systems, 2010.
[20] C. E. Bezerra, F. Pedone, and R. V. Renesse, “Scalable state-machine
replication,” in IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable
Systems and Networks, 2014.
[21] D. da Silva Boger, J. da Silva Fraga, and E. Alchieri, “Reconfigurable
scalable state machine replication,” in Latin-American Symposium on
Dependable Computing, 2016.
[22] Z. Guo, C. Hong, M. Yang, L. Zhou, L. Zhuang, and D. Zhou, “Rex:
Replication at the speed of multi-core,” in European Conference on
Computer Systems, 2014.
[23] H. Cui, R. Gu, C. Liu, T. Chen, and J. Yang, “Paxos made transparent,”
in ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, 2015.
[24] M. Olszewski, J. Ansel, and S. Amarasinghe, “Kendo: efficient determin-
istic multithreading in software,” ACM Sigplan Notices, vol. 44, no. 3,
pp. 97–108, 2009.
[25] M. Kapritsos, Y. Wang, V. Quema, A. Clement, L. Alvisi, and M. Dahlin,
“All about Eve: execute-verify replication for multi-core servers,” in
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, 2012.
[26] R. Kapitza, M. Schunter, C. Cachin, K. Stengel, and T. Distler, “Sto-
ryboard: Optimistic deterministic multithreading.” in Workshop on Hot
Topics in System Dependability, 2010.
[27] A. Bessani, J. Sousa, and E. Alchieri, “State machine replication for the
masses with BFT-SMaRt,” in IEEE/IFIP International Conference on
Dependable Systems and Networks, 2014.
[28] R. Friedman and R. van Renesse, “Packing messages as a tool for boost-
ing the performance of total ordering protocols,” in ACM Symposium on
High-Performance Parallel and Distributed Computing, 1997.
[29] O. M. Mendizabal, R. T. S. Moura, F. L. Dotti, and F. Pedone, “Efficient
and deterministic scheduling for parallel state machine replication,” in
IEEE International Parallel & Distributed Processing Symposium, 2017.
[30] L. Lamport, D. Malkhi, and L. Zhou, “Reconfiguring a state machine,”
SIGACT News, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 63–73, Mar. 2010.
[31] J. Lorch, A. Adya, W. Bolosky, R. Chaiken, J. Douceur, and J. Howell,
“The SMART way to migrate replicated stateful services,” ACM SIGOPS
Operating Systems Review, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 103–115, 2006.
[32] B. White, J. Lepreau, L. Stoller, R. Ricci, S. Guruprasad, M. Newbold,
M. Hibler, C. Barb, and A. Joglekar, “An integrated experimental
environment for distributed systems and networks,” in Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation, 2002.